Trust in Jehovah and do what is good and act with faithfulness, Psalm 37.3.
The Watchtower study article that introduced this as the year text for 2017
opened up a beautiful and practical way of thinking about how to manage problems in life.
Recognize what you cannot do and trust in Jehovah.
Recognize what you can do and do that.
Now, the article gave us a number of examples of people who did that in a variety of circumstances.
Noah recognized that he could not force wicked people to accept his message.
He had no control over when the flood would come.
But he could faithfully proclaim the warning message, and he could build the ark.
So he focused on doing those things, trusting in Jehovah for the rest.
A King David, after sinning, seriously recognized that he couldn't undo what he had done.
Neither could he escape the consequences for what he had done.
But he could avail himself of Jehovah's arrangements, accept correction, and move forward.
And as we take ourselves through that exercise, we can apply that way of thinking
to any number of situations that we face in life.
Recognize what you cannot do and trust in Jehovah.
Recognize what you can do and do that.
And also, think about Bible examples of people who were in a situation that you can identify with.
For instance, say you have an enormously difficult task to accomplish in a very short period of time.
Can you think of someone in the Bible who faced a similar situation?
Many possibilities come to mind.
But let's focus on 2 Chronicles chapter 14, the account of ASA.
2 Chronicles 14, 9 says, later, 0, the Ethiopian came against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots.
How big was ASA's army?
Verse 8 says, 580,000 men with hand weapons.
So 0's army was almost twice as large and far better equipped.
What would ASA do?
Verse 11.
ASA then called to Jehovah his God and said,
O Jehovah, it does not matter to you whether those you help are many or have no power.
Help us, O Jehovah, our God, for we are relying on you.
And in your name we have come against this crowd, O Jehovah, you are our God.
Do not let mortal man prevail against you.
Now, ASA knew that he could not turn 0 away in his own power.
He knew he could not fight a million man army with 300 chariots and win.
So he left the impossible to Jehovah.
But what could ASA do?
Notice verses 12 through 14.
And as you read this, notice what Jehovah gets the credit for and what ASA gets the credit for.
So Jehovah defeated the Ethiopians before ASA and before Judah and the Ethiopians fled.
And ASA and the people with him pursued them as far as Giroir.
And the Ethiopians continued falling.
And ASA continued gathering much spoil, much of which he later sacrificed to Jehovah.
So when faced with an impossible task, ASA recognized what he could not do, trusted in Jehovah.
But he also recognized what he could do and he did that.
Now, did Jehovah actually need ASA's military force more on that in a minute?
But first, how can we apply Psalm 373 today?
Are you facing a difficult work assignment, a challenging personality,
dynamic health crisis, a financial shortfall?
No doubt this Psalm 373 process can help you think productively.
Because of an accident, a brother in the Midwest lost a well-paying job that he held for 14 years.
Now his family had no income.
They supplicated Jehovah.
They trusted in Jehovah.
First and foremost, but was there anything that they could actually do in conjunction with that?
Yes, they cut down on their expenses.
They gleaned in nearby fields.
They fished for their food with help from the congregation and taking some part time work
when it became available.
This family of four managed a year after the accident.
The mother said, we can fool ourselves into thinking that we are relying on Jehovah.
When we are really relying upon our own abilities, our mate, or our job,
we, though, really learned to trust just him.
That is, Jehovah.
These other things can be taken out of the way, but Jehovah never left us.
Not for one moment, though we have just the bare necessities our relationship with Jehovah as
a family is much closer.
Candid observation.
Trust in Jehovah do what is good.
It seems like a simple equation, but how easy it could be to mistake the do what is good
part for trusting in our own abilities?
What happened to Asa more than a decade after his smashing
victory over the million Ethiopians?
2 Chronicles chapter 16 verse 1.
1 through 3.
He faces another confrontation in the 36th year of the reign of King Asa.
King Bayesha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Rema to prevent anyone from
going out or coming in to King Asa of Judah.
What would Asa do in this case?
At that, Asa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of Jehovah's house.
So he is spending Jehovah's money.
Surely he consulted God about that.
And the King's house and sent them to King Ben Haydad of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus,
saying, there is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father.
I'm sending you silver and gold.
Come, break your treaty with the King Bayesha of Israel so that he will withdraw from me.
What was Asa thinking?
Did he consider Bayesha not much of a threat?
Was he thinking he was smart enough to outmaneuver him?
Did his strategy work?
Reading through verses 4 through 6, it might at first appear that his plan was successful.
But what was the problem?
Haneinai explains in verses 7 through 9.
At that time, Haneinai the seer came to King Asa of Judah and said to him,
because you relied on the King of Syria and did not rely on Jehovah your God.
The army of the King of Syria has escaped out of your hand.
We're not the Ethiopians and the Libyans of very great army,
with many chariots and horsemen.
But because you relied on Jehovah, he gave them into your hand.
For the eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in
behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.
You have acted foolishly in this matter, and from now on there will be wars against you.
What can we learn from this account?
Remember, Jehovah.
Remember what Jehovah has done for you in the past.
Continue to rely on him today.
Doing what is good is really an act of faith.
It's evidence of participation of our desire to receive Jehovah's blessing.
But we don't outgrow trusting in Jehovah.
Jehovah is looking for opportunities to show his strength in behalf of those whose
heart is complete toward him.
And that brings us to the account of Ace's son,
Jehoshaphat.
Jehoshaphat doubled Ace's army to exceed a million.
Yet he found himself terrified by the onslaught of Moab-Amen in the mountainous region of Seer.
What did he do?
He trusted in Jehovah.
What good could he do?
Fighting in that instance would have been an act of disobedience because Jehovah told them simply to go out,
stand still, and don't be afraid.
So they sang.
Doing what is good is a reflection of our faith and our desire for Jehovah's blessing.
And when that is the motive, it results in a resounding victory.
Let's go out and have a resounding victory today.